Audit/rfp (#747)
input-output-hk/hydra: docs/standalone/audit_guidelines.md

> To whomever decides to perform an assessment of the security of the Hydra Head protocol implementation version 0.9.

Reviewer: I would not refer to a specific version. Maybe just mention 

```suggestion
This document contains guidelines for anyone who decides to perform an assessment on the security of the Hydra Head protocol specification and implementation released from this repository.
```

> Hydra is an open-source project and, as such, can be freely used, reviewd and audited. Shall you want to perform a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Hydra is an open-source project and, as such, can be freely used, reviewed and audited. Shall you want to perform a
```

security audit, the hydra team would suggest to apply static and dynamic analysis, focused, but not limited to, the areas of concern below.

Shall you decide to share your findings with us, please consider the following, as Per [CIP-52](https://github.com/cardano-foundation/CIPs/tree/master/CIP-0052):
1. Any discrepancies, deviations or spotted vulnerabilities shall be described and classified with an appropriate severity level. Recommendations to rectify the identified deficiencies shall also be provided whenever appropriate.
2. When automated tools are used as a replacement for manual review/code inspection, they shall be documented or referenced. Note that it’s the responsibility of the auditor to ensure that such tooling may not exhibit potential failures that can adversely affect the review outcome.

> 3. Any strategies/methodologies used to assess the consistency, correctness and completeness of the requirements shall also be documented or referenced.

Reviewer: Maybe we can add a note on how to get in touch should one want to do one and how to safely disclose any findings. Maybe we could refer to this https://github.com/input-output-hk/cardano-engineering-handbook/tree/main/policy/security#security.. or just be friendly and accept messages on any of our communication channels from https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/blob/master/SUPPORT.md.

Author: I also though it was missing and agree that is something that we should do.

I'm not sure the engineering handbook is adapted to a public audience.

You're right that our SUPPORT page should provide a _responsible disclosure_ process. But I don't think we have defined any yet.

Let's see if we can find something easy and actionable before merging this P.R. or update this document later if it appears it takes too much time.

# Context and assumptions

The Hydra Head protocol is implemented in the `hydra-node`, which connects to the Cardano network as layer 1 (L1) through a `cardano-node`, to other Hydra Head compliant nodes over an off-chain network, and exposes an API to users of the layer 2. Most relevant artifacts for an audit are:

>  - Coordinated Hydra Head V1 Specification

Reviewer: Let's future proof it

```suggestion
 - Hydra Head Specification
```

* The communications between the hydra-node and any client software connecting through the API are trusted;
* The cardano-node is assumed to have a responsive communication line with the Cardano network such that the hydra-node can react to on-chain transactions in a timely manner. In particular, hydra-node is able to observe head closure and contest in a delay shorter than the contestation period fixed by the protocol.

What is not explicitly trusted in the above list is deemed untrusted. In particular, the other hydra nodes participating in a head are not trusted.

We would appreciate comments about any of the above. Especially if you can suggest less restricting assumptions under which the security properties of Hydra still hold. Or practical suggestions on how to implement these assumptions. We also appreciate recommendations about how to ensure these assumptions hold in a real environment.

If you plan to consider a different operational environment were these assumptions would not be true and plan to share your discoveries with us, please be as explicit as possible about the corresponding assumptions.

# Suggested Tasks

> Broadly speaking, an audit would probably want to ensure that the security properties proven in _Coordinated Hydra Head V1 Specification_ hold for the implementation, taking also into acount the main entry points of a `hydra-node` which are the node to node network communications, the API and the Cardano ledger.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Broadly speaking, an audit would probably want to ensure that the security properties proven in _Hydra Head Specification_ hold for the implementation, taking also into acount the main entry points of a `hydra-node` which are the node to node network communications, the API and the Cardano ledger.
```

Reviewer: And so on. I think we should call the artifact just "The Hydra Head Specification" and not much versioning here.

* a validation that the Hydra plutus scripts validators do check the transaction constraints defined in the Coordinated Hydra Head V1 specification;
* a review and comment on the mutation-based tests applied to the Hydra plutus scripts and, in particular, any adversarial situation that would not be covered by them but should be.

See the documentation of our [Mutation-Based tests](https://hydra.family/head-protocol/haddock/hydra-node/tests/Hydra-Chain-Direct-Contract-Mutation.html).

See [Common Weaknesses](https://plutus.readthedocs.io/en/latest/reference/writing-scripts/common-weaknesses/index.html) and [Vulnerabilities](https://github.com/Plutonomicon/plutonomicon/blob/main/vulnerabilities.md).

## Hydra node chain layer code generates transactions which are consistent with Hydra Head V1 specification

The Coordinated Hydra Head V1 specification defines the transactions the off-chain code should build and post to evolve the head status on-chain.

You could assess that the Hydra node chain layer code can only build transactions which are consistent with the Coordinated Hydra Head V1 specification.

# Out of Scope

> With version 0.9, the Hydra team suggests to focus on the scope described in the above sections and consider anything else as out of scope.
> In particular, the following items shoudl be seen as out of scope:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For a first security audit, the Hydra team suggests to focus on the scope described in the above sections and consider anything else as out of scope.
In particular, the following items should be seen as out of scope:
```

* Hydra Head protocol implementation is immune to attacks via chain transactions.
* Hydra Head protocol implementation is immune to attacks via network.
* Hydra Head protocol implementation faithfully reflects the head state through the API.
* Hydra Head protocol implementation is immune to API attacks.
* Any attack which would be invalid under the assumptions stated above in the document.

# Artifacts

This sections gives a detailed description of the artifacts mentioned above in the document:
 - Coordinated Hydra Head V1 Specification
 - Hydra plutus scripts (on-chain code)
 - Hydra node chain layer code (off-chain code)

## Artifact 1: Coordinated Hydra Head V1 Specification

The Hydra Head protocol implementation derives from [Hydra: Fast Isomorphic State Channels](https://eprint.iacr.org/2020/299.pdf) in several ways. Especially some simplifications have been introduced and generalizations removed.

> The [Coordinated Hydra Head V1 specification](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1XQ0C7Ko3Ifo5a4TOcW1fDT8gMYryB54PCEgOiFaAwGE/) captures these deviations and also includes the "formal notation" of the actual transaction constraints (which are foregone in the original paper). Also, it details the L2 protocol logic for the **Coordinated** Head protocol - which is implemented in V1.

Author: @ch1bo do you have a better link to the new public specification already? Otherwise we keep it that way for know and will update it later.

Reviewer: Yes, definitely. Let's rather link the overleaf (viewing rights): https://www.overleaf.com/read/bbqzmptcxryj

With #693 we will have it in a better place and hopefully also documented how to suggest changes.

Author: OK, thank you for the link.

```suggestion
The [Coordinated Hydra Head V1 specification](https://www.overleaf.com/read/bbqzmptcxryj) captures these deviations and also includes the "formal notation" of the actual transaction constraints (which are foregone in the original paper). Also, it details the L2 protocol logic for the **Coordinated** Head protocol - which is implemented in V1.
```

## Artifact 2: Hydra Head Protocol Implementation

With Hydra Head Protocol Implementation we refer to the software component that is used to operate a node in the Hydra Head protocol. The `hydra-node` allows its users to open a head, lock funds in it, connect to peers, process transactions as a layer 2, close a head and unlock the corresponding funds. It is comprised by the Hydra plutus scripts, Hydra head chain layer, layer 2 code, network communication between peers, and an API for clients to connect and use the node.

* Source code repository: [input-output-hk/hydra](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra)

> * Version ready to be audited: [0.9.0](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/releases/tag/0.9.0)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Version ready to be audited: Any [release](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/releases) after version 0.9.0
```

The following parts are described below:
 - Hydra plutus scripts (on-chain code)
 - Hydra node chain layer code (off-chain code)

### Artifact 2.1: Hydra plutus scripts (on-chain code)

Hydra plutus scripts source code can be found in the [hydra-plutus module](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/tree/master/hydra-plutus).

Hydra plutus mutation based testing can be found in the [hydra-node module](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/tree/master/hydra-node) in test/Hydra/Chain/Direct/Contract/.

### Artifact 2.2: Hydra node chain layer code (off-chain code)

Hydra node chain layer code can be found in the [hydra-node module](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/tree/master/hydra-node) in src/Hydra/Chain/Direct/

> Hydra node chain layer tests can be found in the [hydra-node module](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/tree/master/hydra-node) in test/Hydra/Chain/Direct/

Reviewer: The links here could refer to the directories directly, e.g. [chain layer code](https://github.com/input-output-hk/hydra/tree/master/hydra-node/src/Hydra/Chain)
